docs: How to upgrade bootstrap kubelet? (#592)
kinvolk/lokomotive: docs/how-to-guides/upgrade-bootstrap-kubelet.md

# Upgrading bootstrap kubelet

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Steps](#steps)
  - [Step 1: Drain the node](#step-1-drain-the-node)
  - [Step 2: Find out the IP and SSH](#step-2-find-out-the-ip-and-ssh)
  - [Step 3: Upgrade kubelet on node](#step-3-upgrade-kubelet-on-node)
  - [Step 4: Verify](#step-4-verify)
- [Caveats](#caveats)

## Introduction

> [kubelet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/) is a daemon

Reviewer: >LGTM. Just one question + I'd do `s/Kubelet/kubelet` :smile:

Except this one, because it's the beginning of the sentence :wink:

that runs on every node and it is responsible for managing Pods on the node.

Lokomotive cluster runs two different sets of kubelet processes. Initially, **bootstrap** kubelet
configured on the node as a `rkt` pod joins the cluster, and then kubelet pod managed using
DaemonSet (self-hosted kubelet) takes over the bootstrap kubelet. Self-hosted kubelet allows

> seamless updates between Kubernetes patch version for nodes and also to tune nodes configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
seamless updates between Kubernetes patch versions and node configuration
```

using tools like `kubectl`.

> At the time of writing `lokoctl` cannot update bootstrap kubelet, so this document explains how to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently `lokoctl` cannot update bootstrap kubelet, so this document explains how to
```

perform this operation manually.

## Steps

> Perform the following steps on each node, one node at a time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Perform the following steps on each node, one at a time.
```

Author: I believe `one node at a time` makes it more explicit.

```bash
kubectl drain --ignore-daemonsets <node name>
```

### Step 2: Find out the IP and SSH

Find the IP of the node by visiting the cloud provider dashboard. Then, connect to selected machine
using SSH.

```bash
ssh core@<IP Address>
```

### Step 3: Upgrade kubelet on node

Run the following commands:

> **NOTE**: Before proceeding to other commands, set the `latest_kube` variable to the latest
> Kubernetes version. Latest Kubernetes version can be found by running this command after a cluster
> upgrade: `kubectl version -ojson | jq -r '.serverVersion.gitVersion'`.

```bash
export latest_kube=<latest kubernetes version e.g. v1.18.0>
sudo sed -i "s|$(grep -i kubelet_image_tag /etc/kubernetes/kubelet.env)|KUBELET_IMAGE_TAG=${latest_kube}|g" /etc/kubernetes/kubelet.env
sudo systemctl restart kubelet
sudo journalctl -fu kubelet
```

Check the logs carefully. If kubelet fails to restart and instructs to do something (e.g. deleting
some file), follow the instructions and reboot the node:

```bash
sudo reboot
```

### Step 4: Verify

**When `disable_self_hosted_kubelet` is `true`**:

Once the node reboots and kubelet rejoins the cluster, output of following command will show new

> version across the node name:

Reviewer 2: `version across the node name`.

I didn't understand this

Author: Let's say you are done with worker-0 then you will see the updated version across its name:

```console
$ kubectl get nodes
NAME             STATUS    ROLES    AGE     VERSION
suraj-worker-0   Ready     <none>   1d      v1.18.8
suraj-worker-1   Ready     <none>   1d      v1.18.3
suraj-worker-2   Ready     <none>   1d      v1.18.3
```

```bash
kubectl get nodes
```

**When `disable_self_hosted_kubelet` is `false`**:

Verify that the Kubelet service is in active (running) state:

```bash
sudo systemctl status --no-pager kubelet
```

Run the following command to see logs of the process since the last restart:

```bash

> sudo journalctl _SYSTEMD_INVOCATION_ID=$(sudo systemctl \

Reviewer: What does `_SYSTEMD_INVOCATION_ID` do? Why is it needed here?

Author: > **What does `_SYSTEMD_INVOCATION_ID` do?**

From the docs:
> The invocation ID for the runtime cycle of the unit the message was generated in, as available to processes of the unit in $INVOCATION_ID

So everytime a service is started it has an invocation ID.

> **Why is it needed here?**

It is needed here because we want to see logs since last restart and not the logs since the machine was created.

Reviewer: Seems a bit overly complex to me, but make sense overall, so all good. Thanks for explanation!

                show -p InvocationID --value kubelet)
```

Once you see the following log lines, you can discern that the kubelet daemon has come up without

> errors. kubelet daemon tries to rejoin the cluster it is taken over by the self hosted kubelet pod

Reviewer: Ditto
```suggestion
errors. Kubelet daemon tries to rejoin the cluster it is taken over by the self hosted kubelet pod
```

> # How to upgrade bootstrap Kubelet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# How to upgrade bootstrap kubelet
```

## Introduction

> Bootstrap Kubelet is the Kubelet running on the node as a systemd service. Unlike most components on the cluster, lokoctl cannot update it. So there are some manual steps involved in updating the bootstrap Kubelet.

Reviewer: I think kubelet should be referenced as `kubelet`, not `Kubelet`.

```suggestion
Bootstrap kubelet is the kubelet running on the node as a systemd service. Unlike most components on the cluster, lokoctl cannot update it. So there are some manual steps involved in updating the bootstrap kubelet.
```

> Bootstrap kubelet is the kubelet running on the node as a systemd service. Unlike most components on the cluster, lokoctl cannot update it. So there are some manual steps involved in updating the bootstrap kubelet.

Reviewer: I would improve wording here, but I cannot come up with some specific suggestion.

`running on the node as a systemd service` sounds a bit weird to me. I'd expect something like `running outside Kubernetes cluster` or something.

`Unlike most components on the cluster` maybe we can change to `Unlike most cluster components`.

`lokoctl cannot update it`: I would mention, that this will change in the future. 

`So there are some manual steps involved in updating the bootstrap kubelet.` should we start sentences in docs from `So`? Maybe we rephrase to something like `Updating bootstrap kubelet requires manual steps` or something?

## Steps

> Apply the following steps to all the nodes one at a time.

Reviewer: One at a time is not strictly necessary. I guess it's fine for the time being, but in the long run, we should explain, how to do a rollout without downtime.

Author: I am being conservative with the amount of changes done simultaneously to reduce downtime.

> Apply the following steps to all the nodes one at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apply the following steps to all cluster nodes one at a time.
```

### Drain the node

> 

Reviewer: I'd add some explanation what does it do and why is it needed. If someone runs workload using local storage, it will be disturbed.

Author: Added an explanation.

```

> kubectl drain <node name>

Reviewer: Most likely `--ignore-daemonsets` is needed here.

```

> ### Find out the IP

Reviewer: This section says find the IP address, but then tells to SSH into the node. We should be more explicit.

> # How to upgrade bootstrap Kubelet

Author: I am sorry I don't understand why Kubelet should be all lowercase? 

> For Kubernetes-related terms, follow the capitalization shown in the Kubernetes Concepts documentation.

When the style guide suggest that we follow https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/ and according to my search in the docs `Kubelet` is mentioned with caps.

> # How to upgrade bootstrap Kubelet

Reviewer: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/ and https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/ both use mostly `kubelet`. I think @johananl is right.

> # How to upgrade bootstrap Kubelet

Author: Which means it is again ambiguous whether to all small on kubelet or treat it as proper noun? How does someone decide to use one over another?

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Steps](#steps)
  - [Drain the node](#drain-the-node)
  - [Find out the IP and SSH](#find-out-the-ip-and-ssh)
  - [On the node](#on-the-node)
- [Caveats](#caveats)

## Introduction

> Bootstrap Kubelet is the Kubelet running on the node as a systemd service outside Kubernetes cluster's control. Unlike most cluster components, `lokoctl` cannot update it(which may change in the future). This document enlists the manual steps involved in updating the bootstrap Kubelet.

Reviewer: I'd add line breaks here and add more explanation about the concept of self hosted kubelet.

```suggestion
Lokomotive cluster runs 2 different sets of Kubelet processes. Initially, **bootstrap** kubelet configured on the node as a rkt container performs joining the cluster and then Kubelet pod managed using DaemonSet takes over the node one, which allows to to perform seamless updates between Kubernetes patch version for nodes and also to tune nodes configuration using tools like `kubectl`.

At the time of writing `lokoctl` cannot update node Kubelet, so this document explains how to perform this operation manually. However, if your cluster has self-hosted Kubelet disabled, this guide is not relevant.
```

Author: > However, if your cluster has self-hosted Kubelet disabled, this guide is not relevant.

Self hosted kubelet of or not this doc is relevant to everyone.

Reviewer: The line breaks and explanation is still valuable to be included IMO.

Author: done

> ## Steps

Author: done.

Apply the following steps to all the cluster nodes one at a time.

### Drain the node

> > **Caution:** If you are using a local directory as a storage for a workload, it will be disturbed by this operation. So move the workload to another node and let the application replicate the data. If the application does not support data replication across instances, then expect downtime.

Reviewer: Ditto line breaks.

Author: What do you mean?

Reviewer: Please add some line breaks, so the lines are not so long when editing on wide screen. That improves readability.

Reviewer: This is still not addressed it seems.

Author: done.

> > **Caution:** If you are using a local directory as a storage for a workload, it will be disturbed by this operation. So move the workload to another node and let the application replicate the data. If the application does not support data replication across instances, then expect downtime.

Author: > Please avoid using "then" after conditional sentences.

What should be the transition word here?

```bash
kubectl drain --ignore-daemonsets <node name>
```

### Find out the IP and SSH

Find the IP of the node by visiting the Cloud provider dashboard.

```
ssh core@<IP Address>
```

> ### On the node

Reviewer: We should also add a step how to verify that things are correct after applying changes.

Author: Added.

> ### On the node

Reviewer 3: I find this weird as a title. Titles in a howto guide should be concise, imperative sentences. Example:

- Step 1: Enter the space shuttle.
- Step 2: Fly to Mars.
- Step 3: Land the space shuttle.

Author: Modified

> Run the following commands.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Run the following commands:
```

> > **NOTE**: Export the correct and latest Kubernetes version, before proceeding to other commands.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>NOTE: Before proceeding to other commands, set the `latest_kube` variable to the latest Kubernetes version.
```

I'd avoid squeezing a comment between "Run the following commands:" and the commands. Maybe this can be an inline shell comment.

Reviewer 3: What does "latest" mean? How should the user figure out which version to use?

Author: > What does "latest" mean? How should the user figure out which version to use?

That's a good question. There should be a way for user to know what is the latest kubernetes in `lokoctl`. Since this is upgrading the self-hosted kubelet it is safe to assume that user has already upgraded the control plane, so here it only way to find the lates kuberenetes version is by running `kubectl version` and see what version the server is at.

I think we can say somewhere in the doc that user should upgrade the control plane already. And then ask them to figure out the latest kubernetes version to upgrade kubelet to would be found by running following command:

```bash
kubectl version --short | grep ^Server | awk '{print $3}'
```

```
export latest_kube=<latest kubernetes version e.g. v1.18.0>
sudo sed -i "s|$(grep -i kubelet_image_tag /etc/kubernetes/kubelet.env)|KUBELET_IMAGE_TAG=${latest_kube}|g" /etc/kubernetes/kubelet.env
sudo systemctl restart kubelet
sudo journalctl -fu kubelet
```

> Look at the logs carefully, if Kubelet fails to restart and instructs to do something like deleting a file, then delete it and restart the node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Check the logs carefully. If kubelet fails to restart and instructs to do something (e.g. deleting some file), follow the instructions and reboot the node.
```

```

> sudo reboot

Reviewer 3: What's this? It feels disconnected from the previous section. I would either end the previous instruction with a colon, or remove this code snippet.

```

## Caveats

> - If a node which is running storage workload like Rook Ceph, then verify that the Ceph cluster is in **`HEALTH_OK`** state. If it is in **any other state, do not proceed with upgrades**. When the cluster is in `HEALTH_OK` state a few minutes of downtime of OSDs will not be a problem for Ceph cluster, that happens during node reboot.

Reviewer: Ditto line breaks.

Author: What do you mean?

Author: done

> - If a node which is running storage workload like Rook Ceph, then verify that the Ceph cluster is in **`HEALTH_OK`** state. If it is in **any other state, do not proceed with upgrades**. When the cluster is in `HEALTH_OK` state a few minutes of downtime of OSDs will not be a problem for Ceph cluster, that happens during node reboot.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- When upgrading kubelet on nodes which are running Rook Ceph, verify that the Ceph cluster is in the **`HEALTH_OK`** state. If it is in any other state, **do not proceed with the upgrade** as doing so could lead to data loss. When the cluster is in the `HEALTH_OK` state it can tolerate the downtime caused by rebooting nodes.
```

# Upgrading bootstrap Kubelet

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)
- [Steps](#steps)
  - [Step 1: Drain the node](#step-1-drain-the-node)
  - [Step 2: Find out the IP and SSH](#step-2-find-out-the-ip-and-ssh)
  - [Step 3: Upgrade Kubelet on node](#step-3-upgrade-kubelet-on-node)
  - [Step 4: Verify](#step-4-verify)
- [Caveats](#caveats)

## Introduction

[Kubelet](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/kubelet/) is a daemon
that runs on every node and it is responsible for managing Pods on the node.

Lokomotive cluster runs two different sets of Kubelet processes. Initially, **bootstrap** Kubelet
configured on the node as a `rkt` pod joins the cluster, and then Kubelet pod managed using

> DaemonSet(self-hosted Kubelet) takes over the bootstrap Kubelet. Self-hosted Kubelet allows seamless

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DaemonSet (self-hosted Kubelet) takes over the bootstrap Kubelet. Self-hosted Kubelet allows seamless
```

updates between Kubernetes patch version for nodes and also to tune nodes configuration using tools
like `kubectl`.

At the time of writing `lokoctl` cannot update bootstrap Kubelet, so this document explains how to
perform this operation manually.

## Steps

Perform the following steps on each node, one node at a time.

### Step 1: Drain the node

> **Caution:** If you are using a local directory as a storage for a workload, it will be disturbed
> by this operation. To avoid this move the workload to another node and let the application
> replicate the data. If the application does not support data replication across instances, then
> expect downtime.

```bash
kubectl drain --ignore-daemonsets <node name>
```

### Step 2: Find out the IP and SSH

> Find the IP of the node by visiting the cloud provider dashboard.

Reviewer: I'd expect something like: `Then, connect to selected machine using SSH`.

Maybe instead of SSH, we could do this using privileged DaemonSet? Or using something like https://github.com/kvaps/kubectl-node-shell ?

Author: Added that line. About using kubectl node-shell, I am not sure that should be a team decision to add this tool. Does it work without PSPs? What service account does it use? With webhook server if it uses default service account then it might fail, no?

Reviewer: >Added that line. About using kubectl node-shell, I am not sure that should be a team decision to add this tool. Does it work without PSPs? What service account does it use? With webhook server if it uses default service account then it might fail, no?

I'd expect it to spawn the pod directly on the selected node.

Reviewer: Oh, I wonder if the shell connection breaks if you restart the kubelet :smile: It might not be a good idea then.

```bash
ssh core@<IP Address>
```

### Step 3: Upgrade Kubelet on node

Run the following commands:

> > **NOTE**: Before proceeding to other commands, set the `latest_kube` variable to the latest

Reviewer: I also think this shouldn't say to set it to latest version. This should be taken from `kubectl version` after Lokomotive cluster has been upgraded.

> Kubernetes version.

```bash
export latest_kube=<latest kubernetes version e.g. v1.18.0>
sudo sed -i "s|$(grep -i kubelet_image_tag /etc/kubernetes/kubelet.env)|KUBELET_IMAGE_TAG=${latest_kube}|g" /etc/kubernetes/kubelet.env
sudo systemctl restart kubelet
sudo journalctl -fu kubelet
```

> Check the logs carefully. If `kubelet` fails to restart and instructs to do something (e.g. deleting

Reviewer: Not sure if kubelet here should be in the ticks.

```suggestion
Check the logs carefully. If kubelet fails to restart and instructs to do something (e.g. deleting
```

some file), follow the instructions and reboot the node:

```bash
sudo reboot
```

### Step 4: Verify

Once the node reboots and Kubelet rejoins the cluster output of following command will show new

> version across the node name:

Reviewer: Self hosted kubelet should update the node K8s version anyway, so I'm not sure if this step make sense.

Author: modified it PTAL.
